It's true.
All you really need is love.
What makes you so sure you'll get a medical discharge?
Because I'm a civilian at heart, lover.
And I always follow my heart.
Kiss.
How's that, commander?
Don't call me commander.
It's unromantic.
You're an officer yourself.
How would you like it if I called you Lieutenant Lover?
Let's be democratic.
Just call me "sir."
Yes, sir.
Brass ahoy.
He wants to see you.
He's all yours.
-I'm going for a swim.
-Don't leave me.
-Commander Shears?
-Yes.
My name's Warden.
-How do you do?
-Sorry to intrude--
That's okay, major.
I'm used to it by now.
Like a martini?
That's very kind, but I think not.
-Mind if I have one?
How did you get that?
Where there's a hospital, there's alcohol.
Oh, yes, of course.
Well, I'll be as brief as possible.
I belong to a rather rum group called Force 316.
Our headquarters is up in the Botanical Gardens.
-Protecting rare plants from the enemy?
-Not quite.
-Sure you won't have a martini?
-No, thanks.
We have a particular interest in that railway you worked on.
You could give us no end of valuable information.
Well, I'm leaving for the States in a few days and I've already told your people everything I know.
But you could help us in a rather special sense.
I know it's a terrible imposition but I wonder if you could possibly come out and see us.
Well, if you want to go over the whole thing again.
Oh, that's very kind.
Lord Louis will be grateful.
-Lord who?
-Mountbatten.
-We're one of his special pigeons.
Shall we say this evening, about 8? 
I'll send a car for you.
This evening is out of the question.
Well, tomorrow morning then, about 10?
-Okay, 10:00.
-Thanks very much.
-Cheerio.
Good luck.
Thanks.
I know, you're terribly sorry, but you're going to stand me up tonight.
You couldn't be more wrong.
-May I see your pass, sir, please?
-Oh, yes.
Major Warden's bungalow is at the end of the path.
Good show, Jenkins.
Come along, Thomson.
Use your knife, man.
Very clumsy, Joyce, very clumsy.
Always use your knife immediately, Joyce.
You see, he's gained the initiative.
I'm terribly sorry, sir.
-You're sorry?
-So am I, sir.
-I thought you were the enemy.
-I'm American, if that's what you mean.
-That'll be all, Joyce.
-Yes, sir, sorry, sir.
-What can I do for you, sir?
-I was on my way to see Major Warden.
I'll show you the way.
He'll finish his lecture any moment now.
-That's the end of his lecture.
-Thunderous ovation.
He believes in keeping our training as close to real life as possible.
-Major Warden, sir?
Very good of you to come.
-I hope they took care of you.
-They certainly have.
Well, come along, then.
Colonel Green is looking forward to meeting you.
-Fascinating place, isn't it?
-Utterly charming. 
Didn't realise it was a commando school.
We're trying to discourage the use of that word, such a melodramatic air.
What do you do here?
Sabotage, demolition, that line of country.
We're using P.E., plastic explosives.
It's wonderful stuff.
That pop was made with a lump half this size.
It's twice as powerful as gelignite and only half the weight.
It's quite harmless until it's detonated.
Thanks for telling me.
It's completely waterproof and actually plastic.
You can do what you like with it.
This is my place.
Go ahead.
Oh, I'm dying for a cup of tea.
-Would you care for one?
-No, thanks.
-A drink?
-No, thank you.
-Pot of tea for one, please, Peter.
-Very good, sir.
Do you read this?
Oh, I taught Oriental languages at Cambridge before the war.
I never congratulated you on your escape.
It was a good show.
If your sea-rescue plane hadn't spotted me, I wouldn't be here.
No, I suppose not.
Would you like to see where you were?
All right.
Our information's rather scanty.
It's mostly based on your report.
But we think the camp is about here.
Say, do your people have any idea what happened to Colonel Nicholson?
He had guts.
They were about to shoot him and he didn't bat an eye.
If you're about to be shot there's not much you can do.
Here is the River Kwai, and here is the village where you were helped.
And here is the railway.
But then you must be fairly familiar with all this area.
Not really, I was out of my head half the time.
The railway starts down here in Singapore, through Malaysia, 
Bangkok, Rangoon into India.
-Where was I picked up?
-Oh, about here.
The Japanese aim to open the Bangkok- Rangoon section by the middle of May.
Naturally, we'll try to prevent them.
It's too far for bombers to carry an adequate load.
We'll have to go smash it on the ground.
-How will you get there?
-Parachute drop, then march.
With demolition equipment through that jungle?
Our chief problem is lack of firsthand knowledge.
You see, none of us have ever been there.
-I don't want to discourage--
-It should be interesting.
Colonel Green's given me the Kwai bridge.
I'm gonna take a team in and blow it up.
Lucky you.
Sure you won't have tea?
No, thanks.
I don't want to be rude, but I've got a luncheon date at 2.
-So if there are any questions....
-Of course, I'm sorry.
Well, there is only one question, actually.
How would you feel about going back?
Come again?
I know, under the circumstances, it's a bit much but you have a unique knowledge for our purpose.
And we'd love to have you with us.
That's why you brought me here?
Well, frankly, yes.
Major, I just got out of there.
My escape was a miracle.
Now you want me to go back? Don't be ridiculous!
This is embarrassing--
I don't belong to you, I belong to the American Navy.
Actually, Colonel Green has taken the matter up with your people.
-Your Navy's turned you over to us.
-They can't do this to me. 
-I'm afraid they have.
It was difficult to know how to break it to you.
But they can't do this to me.
My Navy's made a mistake.
I'm not a Navy commander, I'm not even an officer.
I'm just an ordinary swab jockey, second class.
When the Houston sunk, I made it ashore with a real commander.
Later on, we ran into a Japanese patrol.
He was killed.
I figured it was just a matter of time before I was captured--
So you changed uniforms with a dead man.
I thought officers would get better treatment. 
But at Saito's camp, the officers worked along with the rest.
Yes, there's always the unexpected, isn't there?
I kind of got used to being a commander so when I arrived here at the hospital I took a look at the enlisted men's ward and then the officer's ward and I said to myself, "Let's let it ride along for a while."
There were certain advantages.
I saw one of them on the beach.
Anyway, that's the whole story.
The point is, you can't use me.
You want an officer an American commander named Shears who doesn't exist.
When the Navy learns the truth, they'll say: "Ship him home in irons for impersonating an officer."
-Once that happens, I've got it made.
I'd like that drink now.
I'll apply for a medical discharge.
I'll tell them I impersonated an officer because I went off my rocker in the jungle.
I'm getting worse, you know.
Sometimes I think I'm Admiral Halsey.
It's quite a clever plan.
It's not only clever, it's foolproof.
If my Navy finds out who I am those temporary orders won't be worth the paper they're written on.
This is your photograph, isn't it?
-Where did you get this?
-It took a bit of doing because your people couldn't identify you.
Finally your ClNC Pacific sent us a copy of your service record.
The photograph, fingerprints.
Would you care to have a look?
You see, we've known about your actual rank for nearly a week.
Your Navy's in an awkward position.
In one sense you're a blasted hero for making an escape from the jungle.
But at the same time, they can't bring you home and give you the Navy Cross for impersonating an officer.
I suppose that's why they were so happy to hand you over to us.
You see?
Hot potato.
As far as your present rank is concerned we're fairly informal about those things in Force 316.
You'd have the simulated rank of major.
That figures.
Well, as long as I'm hooked, I might as well volunteer.
Good show!
Oh, Colonel Green, sir.
This is Major Shears.
He volunteered to go and help me blow up the bridge.
Really?
Good show!
Get up to sick bay, Baker.
This foot's infected.
The colonel might think I'm malingering.
I'm the medical officer, Baker.
Get cracking.
Will someone tell me why the old man wants us to build a proper bridge?
Don't you worry about old Nick, he knows what he's doing.
Hello, Clipton.
About time you paid us a visit.
Fine job our chaps are doing.
How's he behaving?
He's been most reasonable since we took over.
-I wonder what he's thinking.
-I haven't the foggiest.
-Thanks, Reeves.
-Right, sir.
What do you think?
Quite a challenge, isn't it?
Sir, are you convinced that building this bridge is a good idea?
-Are you serious?
-Yes, sir.
A good idea?
Take another look.
You don't agree morale is high?
Discipline has been restored?
Their condition has been improved?
-Are they a happier lot or aren't they?
They feed better and they are no longer abused.
-Honestly, Clipton, there are times when I don't understand you at all.
I'll try to make myself clear, sir.
The fact is, what we're doing could be construed as forgive me, sir, collaboration with the enemy.
Perhaps even as treasonable activity.
We're prisoners of war, we haven't the right to refuse to work.
I understand that, sir.
But must we work so well?
Must we build them a better bridge than they could have themselves?
If you had to operate on Saito, would you do your best or let him die?
Would you prefer we disintegrate in idleness?
Would you have it said that our chaps can't do a proper job?
It's important to show these people they can't break us in body or in spirit.
Take a good look, Clipton.
One day the war will be over.
I hope that the people who use this bridge in years to come will remember how it was built, and who built it.
Not a gang of slaves, but soldiers. British soldiers, even in captivity.
-Yes, sir.
-You're a fine doctor but you've a lot to learn about the army.
Hold him!
Hold him!
Good morning.
What on earth are you people staring at?
I'm awfully sorry I'm late, sir.
Four minutes late, to be exact.
You were in need of medical attention?
-Sir?
-I was referring to the nurse.
Oh, yes, very ingenious.
Warden was right.
Sit down.
I asked you here to help us pick the fourth member of your team.
-Ask Mr. Joyce to come in.
-Yes, sir.
Chapman here wants Joyce, but I have my doubts about him.
I think he has too much imagination as distinct from cold calculation.
As I've told you before in this job, even when it's finished there's always one more thing to do.
He's the best swimmer in the school, sir.
I'm well aware of your evaluation.
The opinion I want is Shears'.
All right, at ease.
These gentlemen are thinking of taking you for a hike into the jungle.
Yes, sir.
You were an accountant in Montreal?
Not really an accountant, sir.
Exactly what did you do?
Well, sir, I just checked columns and columns of figures which people had checked before me and then other people checked them after I had checked them.
-Sounds a frightful bore.
-Sir, it was a frightful bore.
How did you happen to wind up here?
In '39 I came over to London to enlist.
About two years later I volunteered for this work.
-You volunteered!
-Yes, sir.
Go ahead, you can be frank.
Well, the regular army reminded me of my job in civilian life.
They don't expect you to think.
Think about this.
Are you quite sure you'd be able to use it in cold blood?
I know how to use it, sir.
That's not what I meant.
Could you use it in cold blood?
Could you kill without hesitation?
That's a question I've often asked myself, sir.
It's worried me quite a bit.
And what was the answer?
I don't honestly know, sir.
I've tried to imagine myself....
I suppose I find it hard to kid myself that killing isn't a crime.
It's an old army problem.
Well, I think that's all.
Thank you, Joyce.
Am I to go with the team, sir?
We'll let you know.
You see what I mean.
Well, at least he was honest.
None of us ever know the answer to that question until the moment arises.
What's your opinion, Shears?
Well, sir, he's Canadian.
And that's in keeping with the international composition of this outfit.
If he wants to go, he can even take my place.
Well, if you're all agreed on Joyce, he's yours.
I had a report from air reconnaissance on that village.
There's sufficient clearing to make your jump at last light.
-You've had parachute training?
-No, sir.
This is awkward.
Silly, it never occurred to me.
Well, maybe--
He's right.
Arrange some practice jumps for him.
I'll pop over and check right away.
-All right, Chapman, you can run along.
Well, feel like a sniff of air?
Yes, sir.
You don't realise what a plum you are for us.
Your knowledge of the area, making friends in that village.
It's almost as if your whole escape had been planned with us in mind.
By the way, here's something that'll interest you.
The new L pill.
-L pill?
-L for lethal. Instantaneous, painless.
Much better than the old ones.
For capture, of course.
You're telling me not to be taken alive.
I wouldn't recommend it.
If any of you get hurt or wounded the others will have to leave him behind.
The objective comes first in our work.
You want my honest evaluation of this team?
I didn't want to speak out in front of them.
I understand, go ahead.
Well, Chapman will be fine.
Ice water in his veins.
Joyce is.... He'll be okay.
-It's Warden I don't get.
-Oh, why not?
Cambridge don and all of that.
It's one thing to play with explosives like a kid with firecrackers--
He's not without experience, you know.
When we lost Singapore, he stayed behind to blow up a couple of bridges.
And many other installations before the Japs caught him. 
-Fascinating story.
Sir, it's most annoying.
In view of time, they don't think practice jumps would be worthwhile.
The consensus is, the most sensible thing for Major Shears to do is to go ahead and jump and hope for the best.
With or without parachute?
Oh, very good!
With or without!
He's in the trees!
Yai says we can't reach the Kwai by the route you took.
There are too many Japanese patrols.
We'll swing north through heavy jungle.
-Who's gonna lead the way?
-Yai himself.
He hates the Japanese.
They took all his men.
Which means we shall have to use women bearers.
-Women bearers.
-They're very capable, I'm told.
He says it's dangerous to spend the night in the village.
There's an enemy post three miles away so we'll have to sleep in the jungle.
-What about Chapman?
Is there something wrong?
I was just thinking.
You speak Yai's language and I don't.
He's gonna lead you back to the river by a route I never took.
Will someone tell me why I'm so indispensable to this outfit?
I know how you feel, but there's always the unexpected, isn't there?
Tell that to Chapman.
Let's get cracking.
You're lovely.
Be happy in your work.
Yes, sir.
Leeches.
She's telling you to hold still.
She'll take the leeches off your back.
What's a nice girl like you doing in a place like this?
I'll teach you to say that in Siamese.
No, that would spoil it.
Too much talk always spoils it.
What's wrong with that thing?
It's taken an awful beating.
I can't get a strong signal.
I'll tell you what's wrong.
It's wet, mildewed, corroded, rotten. 
Like everything else in this jungle.
You might as well dump it!
This is Radio Tokyo signing off.
This is your friendliest enemy reminding you to take it easy and never volunteer for anything.
If we stay, we'll be up to our necks.
-I've got it all decoded, sir.
-Read it.
Yes, sir. 
"One, original bridge works reported abandoned.
New construction downstream from first site.
Two, enemy intends to open railway with passage of special train Bangkok for Rangoon with troops and V.l.P.
Estimated to arrive target, a.m. 13th.
Three, synchronize demolition with passage this train.
Four, good hunting. Have fun." 
That's all, sir.
A train and a bridge!
Can we get there in time, sir?
Yai says we're two to three days' march from the Kwai.
If we set a faster pace, we could make it before sundown on the 12th.
It's worth it for the train.
Oh, by all means.
Good hunting. Good show.
Jolly good fun, jolly good.
If you hadn't fixed the radio, we wouldn't know about the train.
Well, there's always the unexpected, isn't there?
-Half a pint, sir.